README.md, before:

# Spam Email Classification System

A production-grade machine learning system designed to robustly classify emails as "Spam" or "Ham" (legitimate). This project features a modular pipeline architecture for training and inference, integrated with a modern Streamlit user interface for easy interaction.

## 🚀 Key Features

- **Advanced ML Pipeline**: Modular design separating data ingestion, transformation, and model training.
- **Multiple Model Support**: evaluation of various algorithms including SVM, Logistic Regression, Decision Trees, and Random Forest.
- **Interactive Web UI**: Built with Streamlit for real-time single-email analysis and batch processing.
- **MBOX Support**: Native capability to process and classify entire `mbox` email archives.
- **Detailed Analytics**: Comprehensive logging and performance metrics (Precision, Recall, F1-Score).

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Language**: Python 3.10+
- **Frontend**: Streamlit
- **ML Framework**: Scikit-learn
- **Data Processing**: Pandas, NumPy, BeautifulSoup4
- **Project Management**: `uv` (recommended) or `pip`

## 📂 Project Structure

```
├── app.py                  # Main Streamlit Web Application
├── requirements.txt        # Project dependencies
├── main.py                 # (Optional) Alternative entry point
├── src/
│   ├── components/         # Core processing modules (Ingestion, Transformation)
│   ├── pipeline/           # Orchestration pipelines (Training, Prediction)
│   ├── config/             # Configuration and parameters
│   └── utils/              # Helper functions, logging, and state management
├── data/                   # Dataset storage (inputs)
├── outputs/                # Training artifacts (models, vectorizers)
└── logs/                   # System runtime logs
```

## ⚡ Installation

1. **Clone the Repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository_url>
   cd Spam-Email-Detection
   ```

2. **Set up Environment**
   It is recommended to use a virtual environment.
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install Dependencies**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## 🖥️ Usage

### 1. Running the Web Application
Launch the interactive dashboard to classify emails instantly.

```bash
streamlit run app.py
```

- **Single Email Tab**: Paste email content to get an immediate Spam/Ham prediction with a confidence score.
- **Batch Processing Tab**: Upload an `.mbox` file to process multiple emails at once and download the results as a CSV.

### 2. Training the Model
(Optional) If you wish to retrain the models on new data:

1. Place your dataset in `data/dataset/dataset.csv`.
2. Run the training pipeline:
   ```bash
   python -m src.pipeline.training_pipeline
   ```
3. Artifacts (Model & Vectorizer) will be saved in the `outputs/` directory.
4. **Important**: Update `src/config/config.py` with the new paths to your generated model and vectorizer if they change.

## ⚙️ Configuration

The system is highly configurable via `src/config/config.py`. You can adjust:
- Model hyperparameters (Grid Search configuration)
- Input/Output paths
- Training parameters (Cross-validation folds, etc.)

## 📊 Model Performance

The pipeline automatically evaluates models using 5-fold cross-validation. Metrics including Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score are logged for each experiment. By default, the system selects the best performing model (often SVM or Random Forest) for inference.

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

Distributed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE` for more information.

Commit message:

Revise contributing guidelines and add author details
Updated contributing section and added author information.

README.md, after:

# Spam Email Classification System

A production-grade machine learning system designed to robustly classify emails as "Spam" or "Ham" (legitimate). This project features a modular pipeline architecture for training and inference, integrated with a modern Streamlit user interface for easy interaction.

## 🚀 Key Features

- **Advanced ML Pipeline**: Modular design separating data ingestion, transformation, and model training.
- **Multiple Model Support**: evaluation of various algorithms including SVM, Logistic Regression, Decision Trees, and Random Forest.
- **Interactive Web UI**: Built with Streamlit for real-time single-email analysis and batch processing.
- **MBOX Support**: Native capability to process and classify entire `mbox` email archives.
- **Detailed Analytics**: Comprehensive logging and performance metrics (Precision, Recall, F1-Score).

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

- **Language**: Python 3.10+
- **Frontend**: Streamlit
- **ML Framework**: Scikit-learn
- **Data Processing**: Pandas, NumPy, BeautifulSoup4
- **Project Management**: `uv` (recommended) or `pip`

## 📂 Project Structure

```
├── app.py                  # Main Streamlit Web Application
├── requirements.txt        # Project dependencies
├── main.py                 # (Optional) Alternative entry point
├── src/
│   ├── components/         # Core processing modules (Ingestion, Transformation)
│   ├── pipeline/           # Orchestration pipelines (Training, Prediction)
│   ├── config/             # Configuration and parameters
│   └── utils/              # Helper functions, logging, and state management
├── data/                   # Dataset storage (inputs)
├── outputs/                # Training artifacts (models, vectorizers)
└── logs/                   # System runtime logs
```

## ⚡ Installation

1. **Clone the Repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository_url>
   cd Spam-Email-Detection
   ```

2. **Set up Environment**
   It is recommended to use a virtual environment.
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install Dependencies**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## 🖥️ Usage

### 1. Running the Web Application
Launch the interactive dashboard to classify emails instantly.

```bash
streamlit run app.py
```

- **Single Email Tab**: Paste email content to get an immediate Spam/Ham prediction with a confidence score.
- **Batch Processing Tab**: Upload an `.mbox` file to process multiple emails at once and download the results as a CSV.

### 2. Training the Model
(Optional) If you wish to retrain the models on new data:

1. Place your dataset in `data/dataset/dataset.csv`.
2. Run the training pipeline:
   ```bash
   python -m src.pipeline.training_pipeline
   ```
3. Artifacts (Model & Vectorizer) will be saved in the `outputs/` directory.
4. **Important**: Update `src/config/config.py` with the new paths to your generated model and vectorizer if they change.

## ⚙️ Configuration

The system is highly configurable via `src/config/config.py`. You can adjust:
- Model hyperparameters (Grid Search configuration)
- Input/Output paths
- Training parameters (Cross-validation folds, etc.)

## 📊 Model Performance

The pipeline automatically evaluates models using 5-fold cross-validation. Metrics including Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-Score are logged for each experiment. By default, the system selects the best performing model (often SVM or Random Forest) for inference.

## 🤝 Build by

Made with ❤️ 

Star this repo if you find it useful!

Author

Bongu Rishi AI  Engineer 
Brand: B My Blood • My Dream • My Legacy
bogurishi07@gmail.com
